---
title: Using git
tags:
    - git
---

Git is a distributed **version control system**. It is a tool that helps you keep track of changes in your codebase.
It is a tool that helps you collaborate with others on a project. It is a tool that helps you manage your codebase.

> Distributed means that every developer has a copy of the repository on their local machine.

Difference of git and GitHub:

- Git is a version control system, installed on your local machine.
- GitHub is a web-based platform that hosts your git repositories. (Consider it as a cloud storage for your codebase)

## Why use git?

- **Collaboration**: Git allows multiple developers to work on the same project at the same time.
- **History**: Git keeps track of every change made to the codebase.
- **Branching**: Git allows you to create branches to work on new features without affecting the main codebase.
- **Revert**: Git allows you to revert to a previous state of the codebase.
- **Backup**: Git is a great way to backup your codebase.

> Git is really suitable for text based project such as codebase.
> It is not suitable for large binary files such as images, videos, etc.

## Git concepts

```meimaid
graph LR
    A[Commit 1] --> B[Commit 2]
    B -->|Master| C[Commit 3]
    B -->|New_branch| D[Commit 4]
    C --> E[Commit 5]
    E --> F[Commit 6]
    D -->|Merge| F
    F --> G[Commit 7]
```

- **Repository**: A repository is a collection of files and folders that are being tracked by git.
- **Commit**: A commit is a snapshot of the codebase at a specific point in time.
  - You can think of a commit as a save point in a video game.
  - We can revert to a previous commit if needed.
  - Each commit has a unique identifier called a hash.
- **Branch**: A branch is a separate line of development.
  - The main branch is called `master`.
- **Merge**: Merging is the process of combining two branches into one.
  - **Conflict**: A conflict occurs when two branches have made changes to the same line of code.
  - We have to manually resolve the conflict.
- **Remote**: A remote is a copy of the repository that is hosted on a server.
  - GitHub is a popular remote.
  - **Pull**: Pulling is the process of downloading changes from the remote to your local machine.
  - **Push**: Pushing is the process of uploading changes from your local machine to the remote.
  - **Clone**: Cloning is the process of downloading a copy of the repository from the remote to your local machine.
  - **Fork**: Forking is the process of creating a copy of a repository on GitHub.

## Basic git commands

Nowaday, many IDEs and code editors has built-in GUI for git. But understand the basic git commands could help you understand what is happening behind the scene.

- `git init`: Initialize a new git repository.
- `git clone <url>`: Clone a repository from a remote.

Create a new commit (Save point):

- `git add <file>`: Add a file to the staging area.
- `git add .`: Add all files to the staging area.
- `git commit -m "message"`: Commit the changes to the repository.

Add remote:

- `git remote add origin <url>`: Add a remote to the repository.

Push to remote:

- `git push origin master`: Push the changes to the remote.
- `git push -u origin master`: Push the changes to the remote and set the upstream.
- `git push`: Push the changes to the remote.

Pull new change:

- `git pull`: Pull the changes from the remote.

Create a new branch:

- `git branch <branch-name>`: Create a new branch.
- `git checkout <branch-name>`: Switch to a branch.
- `git checkout -b <branch-name>`: Create a new branch and switch to it.

Merge branches:

During the merge process, you may encounter a conflict. You have to manually resolve the conflict. Merging operation is not always successful.

- `git merge <branch-name>`: Merge the branch into the current branch.

Revert to a previous commit:

- `git log`: Show the commit history.
- `git checkout <hash>`: Revert to a previous commit.

Deletion:

- `git branch -d <branch-name>`: Delete a branch.
- `git push origin --delete <branch-name>`: Delete a remote branch.
- `git rm <file>`: Remove a file from the repository.

## Typical git workflow

1. Create a new branch for a new feature.
2. Make changes to the codebase.
3. Add and commit the changes.
4. Push the changes to the remote.
5. Create a pull request.
6. Review the changes.
7. Merge the changes into the main branch.

## Tips

- **Pull before work**: Always pull the latest changes from the remote before starting to work.
- **Commit often**: Commit your changes often. It is easier to revert to a previous commit if needed.
- **Write meaningful commit messages**: Write a meaningful commit message that describes the changes you made.
- **Use branches**: Use branches to work on new features without affecting the main codebase.
- **Review changes**: Review the changes before merging them into the main branch.
- **Resolve conflicts**: Resolve conflicts as soon as possible.
